---
title: 'The Premonition'
slug: 'premonition'
date: '2021-07-03'
tags: 'fiction,book'
---

# Details about the book 

The book is by Andy Weir, the author of the Martian.  

I finished the book on July 3, 2021.  It's 496 pages long according to Google.  I enjoyed it.

There are 30 chapters, 29 and an epilogue, centered on the main character with flashbacks; however, those flashbacks don't get dedicated chapters.

# Premise

An odd spectral emission results in the discovery that the sun's light output is diminishing exponentially.  The story follows a scientist's journey to prevent the impending apocalypse that is sure to follow.

# Characters

- Ryland Grace

Protagonist, a former academic that was researching life that doesn't begin with water, that now teaches children science.

- Stratt
Program Director for the Hail Mary project to find a way to address the astrophage on the sun.  She is not bound by law by any country and can conscript people to work for her.  Has a blank cheque for anything.  It's part of the authorizations endowed upon her as part of the role she has been selected for, in order to cut through red tape and get a potential solution as soon as possible.

- Rocky
An engineer that works with Grace throughout the book.

# Plot

The book beings with Grace waking up and not remembering anything.  Throughout the book he recovers his memory. He recalls that he's on a ship being sent to a star 12 light years away from Earth called Tau Ceti.  During his time on Earth, he learns from a friend and eventually it's announced to the world that something is reducing the sunlight that the Earth gets from the sun.  A probe is promptly built and sent to Venus which is where spectra is coming from that may be the cause of the issue with the sun.  It returns with a sample as a soon as possible.  We learn that whatever is covering the sun and interacting with Venus is covering it at an exponential rate and will sufficiently dampen the light output to cause catastrophic change to the climate on Earth, in the form of another ice age.

Grace gets a visit from Stratt to experiment with the returned sample.  She was referred to him by the scientific community and she uses him as a guinea pig, so more important people don't potentially die with what could be an extremely dangerous sample.  During his experiments with the sample, which he coins 'Astrophage', now referred to as 'AP', he kills one with a nano syringe (a nano scale syringe).  To his chagrin, he finds that it's water based...despite having been on the sun.  The sample also absorbs all light (this part probably isn't right) and maintains a constant temperature of 97 degrees Celsius.  This ends his time with the sample before it is sent all over the world to other scientists.

After having an epiphany, Grace begs Stratt for some of the sample that is in very short supply.  She relents and he gets to work with 3 cells.  He accidentally figures out their life cycle / how they reproduce after simulating CO2 spectra and one of the cells pops out of its slide.  The astrophage can move around the speed of light when they want to it seems.  He finds the missing cell by detecting it via temperature since it's at a constant temperature of 97 Degrees Celsius.  Instead of finding one, he finds two.  He hypothesizes that when the Astrophage are ready to reproduce they move towards CO2 spectra.  He lets Stratt know and she flys him to a Chinese air carrier, where she conscripts him to work on Project Hail Mary, a mission to discover a means of addressing the problem of Astrophage on the sun, by sending a spaceship (with 3 astronauts) on a suicide mission to a star 12 light years away from Earth to find out why one particular star isn't affected by Astrophage when all of the ones in its proximity are.  They are to send probes back with the information back to Earth.  The astronauts are left to die because there isn't enough fuel to bring them back, only to get them there.

Grace arrives at Tau Ceti, having recovered more of his memories but not all of them.  He is the only one alive.  The other two astronauts didn't survive the induced coma that was required for the 3-4 year trip.  An alien spacecraft moves towards him shortly after his arrival to the star.  They slowly communicate and culminate in building a shared language that they can use to communicate with each other so that they can ask science questions.  The alien ship builds a tunnel with a Xenon based substance (coined xenonite by Grace).  They meet each other on the tunnel between the two ships.  Grace learns that the alien's star is also afflicted with AP.  Grace calls the alien 'Rocky' due to its rock-like carapace.  He is around 1.5m in a diameter and is like a spider with five legs instead of eight and he weighs 300lbs.  Rocky doesn't have eyes and sees via echo-location.  Also, Grace hypothisizes Rocky communicates with sound via the same mechanism as a whale.  We learn that Rocky is the last survivor on his ship of a crew of 23.  Their species, referred to as Eridians because they originate from a star that was named 'Erid', developed a space program in response to the AP threat so their space program was in its infancy.  His crew mates died from radiation poisoning, because they didn't know about radiation.  Rocky only survived because he lived near the engine which is covered in AP which absorbs radiation.  AP is a really good rocket fuel due to how much energy it stores.  The Eridians also had a lot of trouble getting to Tau Ceti because they didn't know about relativity.

The pair (Grace and Rocky) come to the conclusion that the must go to a nearby planet, which Grace calls 'Adrian' (probably in reference to the movie 'Rocky' and how 'Rocky' in the movie has a wife named 'Adrian').  Grace invites Rocky over to his ship.  Rocky has to make a bubble in which to live in because he can't survive in Earth based climates (he needs Ammonia and high temperatures and pressure).  Whilst in the vicinity of the planet, they discover an organism that eats AP.  They call the organism 'Taumoeba' (Tau and Amoeba), which I'll be abbreviated 'T'.  While experimenting the with the T, it somehow gets loose and gets into the AP fuel reserves of the Hail Mary.  It eats most of it causing a power outage.  They survive on backup power until the clean the T infestation and use the AP fuel on the probes of the Hail Mary to facilitate their escape from the proximity of Adrian that they had to dip into to get a sample of the T.  We learn that Rocky's ship still has a lot of fuel despite him having been stuck in the system for over 70 years.  He offers to give Grace enough to get home.  

In a series of flashbacks that occur throughout the novel, astronaut volunteers are recruited throughout the world for the suicide mission to Tau Ceti. Grace designs the AP reactor for mass production of the AP.  World class scientists from around the world are recruited to the Hail Mary project.  The group destroys Antarctica via nuclear missile to accelerate global warming via the resulting methane emissions to counteract the sunlight reduction.  They also use a litany of solar panels and use them to cover a significant area of the Sahara desert in order to fill the reactor produced AP with energy at a sufficient scale in order to get the Hail Mary ship to Tau Ceti.  Nine days before the launch date, one of the astronauts scheduled to go on the trip and his substitue die in an AP experiment accident.  Grace is suggested in as the ideal replacement due to his science background, his gene to survive the three year coma, and him having been considered the 'second' to Stratt's 'first' by everyone in the Hail Mary program.  Ultimately, Grace declines with a litany of weak excuses as reasons to not go.  Stratt puts him in a prison until just prior to launch in order to force him to go.  Just prior to Grace being put on the Hail Mary, Stratt visits him in prison.  She tells him why she's doing what she's doing (wants to increase the odds of success of the mission) and gives him a shot that makes him forget his memories temporarily so that he'll do his job and by the time he recovers his memories to remember that she forced him into it, he'll be too committed to back out.  She also tells him that she thinks he's a coward, doesn't respect him and overwhelming risk-averse but ultimately thinks he is a good person.

The pair (Grace and Rocky) test the T to survive in Venus and 'Threeworld', the planets where the AP on their respect suns get their CO2 from.  The T dies.  T has low N2 tolerance, which is odd because N2 doesn't react with very much.  Both planets have N2, which kill the T.  The pair come up with the idea to evolve N2 tolerance into the T, so that it can survive on the targetted planets.  They build the reactors out of xenonite and breed the successful iterations and weed out the ones that die.  Ultimately, they're successful.  They build reactor vessels for both of the their ships and mass produce the T.  The pair part ways after a trading of each species technologies.

About a month on his journey home, Grace discovers that there's a T leak.  He comes to the realization that not only have they evolved N2 tolerance into the T.  They've also trained the T to move into the crevices of the xenonite to avoid being killed by N2, allowing them to survive after an environment has been flooded with N2 and return after the N2 is gone, as well as to leak out of xenonite containers.  Grace manages to contain the T and prevent it from escaping by storing the T that's produced in plastic and epoxy.  He realizes that Rocky is in trouble because his entire ship is made of xenonite and that T can sense AP so he'll be out of power soon.

Grace makes the decision to send of the four probes with all that he his learned to Earth.  He corrects course and goes to Rocky, knowing that it's a suicide mission because he won't have enough food or fuel to make it to save Rocky and drop him off on Erid and make it home.  He also can't survive on Eridian food since they would all kill him from heavy metal poisoning.  He finds Rocky injured.  The T had indeed gotten into his AP fuel and stranded him.  Rocky and Grace come up with the idea that once Grace runs out of food he can eat T, as it seems the life on Adrian may have seeded both Earth and Erid with life and could be the common ancestor of them both.  

In the epilogue, Grace has been living on Erid for the past 15 years and is teaching Eridian children science.  We learn that the Erid made Grace an environment on which he could survive on their planet and they solved his food issues with some R and D but not before he developed scurvy and other diet based maladies. Rocky comes by to tell him that Earth got the probes he sent off as they monitored the light of Earth and noticed that the sun's output has increased.  Grace has yet to decide on whether to go home or not.